
1      
Air Defense Artillery 
1. Introduction.  
a. Purpose. Army ADA organizations provide the Army and Joint Forces with a capability to defend 
against  a wide array  of hostile  aerial  and missile  threats  while  ensuring a modular  and expeditionary  force 
able to meet future Joint Force requirements. Combat -proven ADA weapons platforms (shooters) and 
early warning systems (sensors) provide the Army and Joint Forces with technologically advanced, full y 
digitized capabilities enabling detection and engagement of air and missile threats much earlier, at 
greater distances, and with increased lethality while simultaneously reducing risk to friendly forces. ADA 
organizations are ideally suited for frequent support to Joint, Interagency, Intergovernmental, and 
Multinational (JIIM) operations and their employment can achieve strategic, operational, and/or tactical 
advantage on the battlefield. In concert with the entire Army, ADA organizations are constituted to remain 
operationally adaptable. Air Defense- Airspace Management (ADAM) cells at the divisions, brigade 
combat teams (BCTs) (e.g. Armor, Infantry and Stryker), functional brigades (e.g. Fires and Combat Aviation Brigades (CAB)), multifunctional brigades,  and the Ground- Based Mid- Course Defense (GMD) 
Brigade continue to add challenging assignment opportunities. Current positions include assignments to 
Patriot Battalions, Patriot/Avenger Composite Battalions, Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) 
Batteries, Indirect Fire Protection Capability (IFPC)/Avenger Battalions, Avenger Battalions,  Maneuver 
Short Range Air Defense (M- SHORAD) Battalions , AN/TPY -2 Forward Based Mode (FBM) Radar 
Batteries, and Joint Tactical Ground Station (JTAGS) Detachments. The Air Defense Branch resides within the Fires Center of Excellence, a collaboration of ADA and Field Artillery training institutions and 
communitie s. This relationship has generated interest in forging a holistic Fires Officer, versed in ADA, 
FA, maneuver, fires and effects (MFE), and tactical and technical employment  concepts.  
b. Proponent Information. Office, Chief of Air Defense Artillery (OCADA), 73 0 Schimmelpfennig 
Road, Fort Sill, Oklahoma 73503. The t elephone number is or commercial (580)  442-0617 or  
DSN 495 -0617  
c. Functions.  
(1) ADA unit missions vary based on system  capabilities.  
(a) Avengers  provide a gun/missile  capability  to supported  maneuver  elements.  Integration with infantry, 
armor, artillery, aviation, and logistics elements are critical to the success of these systems on the 
battlefield.  
(b) Sentinel Radars and the Forward Area Air Defense (FAAD) Command, Control, Communications, 
Computers,  and Intelligence (C4I)  digital  communications  architecture provide early  warning,  detection, 
and identification of enemy aircraft, helicopters, unmanned aerial systems (UASs), remotely -piloted 
vehicles, and cruise missiles.  
(c) Patriot  missile  systems  defeat  a wide variety  of air and missile  threats.  Routinely  in support  of joint and 
multi- national operational echelons, The Patriot missile system primarily functions as a Tactical Ballistic 
Missile (TBM) interceptor in the lower tier of the terminal phase of  flight.  
(d) THAAD  missile  systems  defeat  Ballistic  Missile  (BM)  threats  in the terminal  phase of flight.  Combatant 
Commanders  (COCOM)  deploy  THAAD  systems  and radar  variants  as tactical  and/or  strategic  assets.  
(e) IFPC  systems  provide advanced warning and intercept  capability  to Soldiers  and critical assets  from 
indirect fire  threats.  
(2) The Way Ahead.  As the Army  experiences  an era of increasing requirements  in the face of 
diminishing resources, ADA expects to see growth  in both the active component and reserve component. 
M-SHORAD and IFPC  is being reestablished within Army Division and Corps  formations. Total Army 
analysis (TAA) 22 -26 indicates four M- SHORAD Battalions and four IFPC Battalions will stand up 
incrementally  over the next seven fiscal years  in the active Army . Follow on TAAs are expected to identify 
one additional IFPC Battalion for the active Army, as well as four M- SHORAD and three IFPC Battalions 
for the Army National Guard (ARNG).  
(3) Unique features of work in ADA. The descriptions below provide a general overview of the nature of 
work specific to ADA officers, and warrant officers based on organizational design. The term ADA 
officer(s)  refers  to both commissioned and warrant  officers  assigned to Branch code  14 or the 140 series 
military occupational specialty (MOS). Although the nature of some work is similar at company -level 
grades, not all assignment functions and requirements are interchangeable. Specific career path information is provided throughout this  document.  
(a) Assignments to Modified Table of Organization and Equipment (MTOE) units provide opportunities to 
command, control, and direct ADA organizations at detachment, platoon, battery, battalion, and brigade   
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
2 levels. Staff assignments are also characteristic of MTOE assignments. These skills are essential to 
professional development and expansion of experience in personnel matters (S -1), intelligence (S -2), 
training and operations (S -3), and supply and logistics  (S-4). 
(b) Assignments in table of dis tribution and allowances (TDA) organizations provide opportunities  similar to 
those stated above, but lend themselves more to broadening experiences such as capabilities, materiel, 
and training development, and platform instruction for  officers.  
(4) ADA Officer tasks. The information below provides a broad outline of an ADA officer's mission 
essential task  list: 
(a) Serve as Soldiers first and maintain empathy and the Warrior  Ethos.  
(b) Integrate (plan  and employ)  ADA forces  into Army  or JIIM organizations  to defeat  third-dimension 
threats.  
(c) Plan Army airspace command and control and targeting as part of an Army or JIIM team.  
(d) Provide early warning of air and missile threats to Army and/or JIIM forces.  
(e) Serve as ADA advisors to U.S., allied, and coalition forces.  
(5) ADA assignment opportunities other than  MTOE.  
(a) Develop, review, and evaluate doctrine and training for all ADA  organizations.  
(b) Train, develop, and evaluate ADA skills at combat training centers  (CTCs).  
(c) Serve in positions requiring specific as well as general technical and tactical skills, such as  staff 
officers  in organizations  and activities  requiring  ADA expertise (includes  JIIM and Army  staffs).  
(d) Serve as instructors at pre- commissioning programs and service schools.  
(e) Serve as ADA advisors to Army National Guard (ARNG) and U.S. Army Reserve (USAR) 
component organizations.  
(f) Serve as a Fires Officer at the Fires Center of Excellence (FCoE).  
 
2. Officer Characteristics  required  
a. General. For Army officers , everything begins with the warrior ethos. They must be warri ors who can 
effectively apply the four core dimensions of leadership: values, attributes, skills, and actions. The four 
core leadership dimensions provide the basis for what a leader must be, know, and do. Values and 
attributes set the basis for the charac ter of the leader - what a leader must be. Skills developed by 
leaders  establish  competence - what  a leader  must  know.  Actions  leaders  conduct  and execute  constitute 
leadership - what a leader must do. This leadership framework, in concert with embracing the warrior 
ethos, describes a leader of character and competence who acts to achieve results across the spectrum 
of operations, from total war to stability and support operations, disaster relief, or realistic training 
operations. An Army officer and leader, by virtue of assumed role or assigned responsibility, inspire and 
influences people to accomplish organizational goals. Army leaders motivate people both inside and 
outside the chain of command to pursue actions,  focus  thinking,  and shape  decisions  for the greater  good 
of the organization ADP 6- 22. These occur through leadership -  the process of influencing people by 
providing purpose, direction, and motivation to accomplish the mission and improve the organization ADP 6-22. The nation and the Army have articulated the expectations of leaders in the Army. The Army 
leadership requirements model in FM 6- 22 illustrates the expectations of every leader. Air Defense 
Artillery and the Army rely on effective teams to perform tasks, achieve objectives, and accom plish 
missions. As such, building and maintaining teams (internally and externally to the organization) is essential to mission command FM 6-22. 
b. Unique knowledge and skills of an ADA officer. ADA officers  are: 
(1) Premier Warfighters who maintain the Warrior E thos at all  times.  
(2) Joint and expeditionary  minded.  
(3) Worldwide deployable, motivated, disciplined, and physically  fit. 
(4) Grounded in Army Core Values.  
(5) ADA officers must be capable of employing systems in tactical, operational, and/or strategic 
environments,  training Soldiers,  and units  to perform their  wartime  missions,  and developing  plans  as part 
of an Army or JIIM team.  
(6) ADA officers  are guided  by the four dimensions  of leadership:  values,  attributes, skills,  and actions  (for 
additional discussion of these leader development dimensions, see FM 6- 22, Leader Development). 
Leaders who consistently display competencies enabling them to adapt to the full spectrum of operations 
comprising today's contemporary operating environment (peacetime, disaster relief, cont ingency 
operations, and war).    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
3  
3. Officer Leader  Development.  
a. Officer Development Model. All officers are expected to possess the base characteristics enabling 
them to develop into agile and adaptive leaders. These leaders must be competent in their core 
proficiencies. They must be broad enough to operate across the spectrum of conflict. Be able to operate 
in JIIM environments  and leverage other  capabilities  in achiev ing their objective,  culturally  astute and able 
to use this awareness and understanding to conduct operations innovatively, courageous enough to 
observe and exploit opportunities in the challenges and complexities of the objective environment, and grounded in Army values and warrior ethos. Further explanations of these characteristics are referenced 
in FM 3-0 and a more detailed discussion  of officer  leader  development  can be studied in this publication.  
b. Air Defense Artillery  Officer  Development.  The ADA branch provides  diverse assignment  opportunities 
allowing for numerous career developmental paths. The branch strives to produce and sustain highly qualified tactically and operationally oriented officers through experience gained during a variety of assig nments in either operational or generating force units, or during broadening assignments and self - 
development  activities.  
c. Goal. The goal is to maintain a vigorous, viable career path for ADA branch officers, optimizing the 
company  and field grade inventor y to meet  branch authorizations,  providing  sufficient  flexibility  to support 
branch or multi -functional positions and providing optimal time in key developmental assignments while 
stabilizing the force.  
d. Branch life cycle functions.  
(1) Structure. The preponderance of the ADA force serves in Patriot organizations. Within the Active 
Component,  there are Patriot  Battalions,  Composite Patriot/Avenger  Battalions,  IFPC/Avenger  Battalions, 
M-SHORAD Battalions, AN/TPY -2 Forward Based missile defense batteries,  and THAAD Batteries under 
the construct of ADA Brigades and Army Air and Missile Defense Commands (AAMDCs). The Army 
National Guard (ARNG) has a AAMDC , ADA brigades, and Avenger battalions. The GMD brigade and 
battalion in the ARNG will remain vital to gl obal force missions and the National Defense Strategy. 
Critical assignments remain in multifunctional and functional  BCTs,  divisions,  and corps  and are integral  
to the ADAM/BAE functional  concept  as well  as the Counter -Unmanned Aerial Systems (C -UAS) concept 
of operations.  
(2) Acquisition. Officers will continue to be accessed through United States Military Academy (USMA), 
ROTC, and the Officer Candidate School (OCS). Warrant Officers will continue to be recruited from 
both the Noncommissioned Officer Corps and Regular Army Officer Corps. Both officer and warrant 
officer accessions are based on preference, technical and tactical qualifications, and needs of the Army. 
The branch will also remain a donor branch for detailed officers from other combat support/ combat 
service support  branches.  
(3) Individual Training and Education. Job analysis identifying the required knowledge, skills, and abilities 
originally  led to the suggested training  and education for CMF  14 officers  listed  within  this publication.  The 
training and education has been periodically updated to conform to changing requirements and to maintain a clear path to professional  development.  
(4) Distribution. Officers will be provided assignment opportunities to develop the skills and experience 
base necessar y for service  at the next higher  grade.  The sequencing and timing  of assignments  is driven 
by Army  priorities.  
(5) Deployment.  ADA officers  are warfighters  who must  remain personally  and professionally  prepared to 
deploy worldwide at all times. Whether assigned to warfighter -centric units or training organizations, 
readiness is imperative to the success of the mission. ADA officers must prepare themselves and their 
Families for planned and no- notice deployments. In today's fast -paced and uncertain operating 
environment, Families must be ready for multiple deployments of unknown duration.  
(6) Sustainment. Officer Personnel Management  System:  
(a) Promotion. Skills, experience, duty performance, and adherence to branch requirements are all 
factors  influencing  promotion;  promotion rates will  be determined by Army  needs  and the Defense Officer 
Personnel Management Act  goals.  
(b) Command. Commands at battalion and brigade level are organized into four functional categories: 
operations, strategic support, recruiting and training, and installation. Officers have the option to compete for selection within a desired command category and can decline other categories without 
prejudice. Officers selected for command may submit operational and personal deferment requests. 
Since Centralized Selection List (CSL) process may change, officers should contact ADA assignments 
officers at  Human Resources  Command (HRC)  to receive the latest  information.  The results  of the    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
4  
command selection process are announced in the CSL. (Note: Though not currently selected via 
CSL, ADA has recently implemented Command Chief Warrant Officer pos itions at each AAMDC and 
the U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense / Army Forces Command)  
(c) Officer Evaluation Report (OER ). The OER will reinforce the link between officer development 
and the Officer Personnel Management System.  
(7) Professional Development. Officer development should occur through a methodological sequence of 
institutional training and education, progressive operational and broadening assignments in tactical, 
training, and staff assignments, and self -development. The goal is to develop officers professionally to 
proficiently accomplish ADA mission essential task list -related functions during joint and combined arms 
operations. A detailed discussion of officer development can be found in this  publication.  
(8) Transition. The officer separation proc ess remains unchanged; however, ADA officers need to be 
mindful  of the coming fluctuations  of the Army  force structure and leverage  opportunities  to transition to a 
shortage career field should ADA become over  strength.  
(9) Broadening Guiding Principles  - Assignments that are not Key Developmental (KD) (see figure 12- 1) 
are considered broadening. However, in order to maximize broadening return on investment, consider the 
following:  
(a) Assignment must be tied to future Army  requirements.  
(b) Broadened officers must be deliberately managed on a continuous career  path.  
(c) Select the right person for the program/opportunity.  
e. Lieutenant  Development.  
(1) Education. The Lieutenant attends the ADA Basic Officer Leader Course (BOLC) Phase B  (proponent 
institutional training) after completing pre- commissioning training in BOLC Phase A. 
(2) KD Assignments. Lieutenants are assigned to a Battery/Company in a platoon leader position within a 
Patriot battalion, Patriot/Avenger composite battalion, Avenger battalion, M- SHORAD battalion, 
IFPC/Avenger composite battalion, Missile Defense Battery, or THAAD battery. As platoon leaders, 
lieutenants will gain valuable experience and training that becomes the "cornerstone" of their career 
development. Platoon leaders in Patriot and THAAD batteries are expected to train and perform as 
tactical control officers  (TCO).  
(3) Developmental and Broadening Assignments. Additional developmental duty positions for seasoned 
platoon leaders include executive officer (XO), battalion staff officer, liaison officer, and aide-de-camp.  
(4) Self-development.  By law, officers  must  obtain an Undergraduate  degree  before promotion to captain 
(CPT). A self -development program enhancing professional development through lifelong learning must 
also begin at the grade of  lieutenant.  
(5) Desired experience. The focus of effort during the lieutenant years is to master the basic skills of the 
ADA Branch and acquire, reinforce, and hone troop- leading skills. Lieutenants must seek leadership 
positions in troop units whenever possible, as this is t he best means to become educated in Army 
operations,  building  a strong  foundation  for future service  as an Army  officer.  Accompanying  development 
of technical, tactical, logistics, and administrative skills are important in these assignments, but leading 
Soldiers embodies the essence of leadership development for lieutenants and CPTs. Inculcation of the 
Warrior Ethos and Army Core Values  are essential to the character development of young officers prior 
being promoted to CPT, officers must possess an in- depth knowledge of ADA and combined arms 
operations gained through experience in MTOE warfighting units.  
f. Captain  Development.  
(1) Education. Officers generally attend the Captains' Career Course (CCC) following selection for 
promotion to CPT.  Select  ADA officers  may have  an opportunity  to attend the resident  phase  of another 
combat arms branch CCC or the U.S. Marine Corps Expeditionary Warfare School. These schools are extremely competitive and provide increased benefits to the officer and both branches.  
(2) KD Assignments. CPTs must aggressively prepare for and seek the skills and experience to prepare 
them for duties at the grade of major (MAJ). The following are considered KD assignments for ADA CPTs:  
(a) ADA battery  command (exceptions  may include command  of another  combat  arms  battery  or 
company).  
(b) HHB or Maintenance Company/Service Battery commander of an active component  ADA 
organization.  
(c) HHC comm ander of an active component non- ADA organization (such as company command of 
Divisional HHC Units, company commander of Basic Training Company, or Initial Entry Training 
Company).    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
5  
(d) Joint Tactical Ground Station (JTAGS)/AN/TPY -2 FBM detachment  command.  
(e) Officers in Corps Year Groups 2004 or earlier receive KD credit for ADAM Cell OIC assignments 
within a Divisional BCT, Multifunctional Brigade, or Functional Brigade to include Aviation, Fires,  and 
Battlefield Surveillance Brigades (BfSB). (IAW HRC assignment policy during that  timeframe)  
(3) Developmental and Broadening Assignments. Completion of CCC and a minimum of 12 months in 
one of the above KD positions will fully qualify CPTs for promotion to MAJ; the optimal timeline will 
provide for an 18-month command experience. Officers will not suffer prejudice towards promotion or 
assignment consideration because of not having commanded at the battery/company level. Some CPTs 
may also be assigned to either branch- specific or generalist assignments,  allowing them to develop a 
wider perspective of the Army or other services (some examples  below):  
(a) ADA Brigade/AAMDC Air Defense Artillery Fire Control Officer (ADAFCO; ASI:  T4) 
(b) Patriot Top Gun positions (ASI:  T5) 
(c) Multinational Transition Team Trainer  (MTT)/Advisor.  
(d) CTC observer/controller  (O/C).  
(e) Small group instructor.  
(f) ADA battalion/brigade staff  officer.  
(g) GMD brigade staff  officer.  
(h) Battalion or brigade tactical director  (TD).  
(i) Space and Missile Defense Command (SMDC) staff  officer.  
(j) Battlefield Coordinat ion Detachment staff  officer.  
(k) Army/Army Command (ACOM)/Army Space (ARSPACE) staff  officer.  
(l) ADAM cell officer within a BCT, Multifunctional Brigade, or Functional Brigade to include 
Aviation, Fires, and BfSB.  
(m) Security Force Assistance Brigade (SFAB).  
(n) Other branch developmental positions (e.g., Asymmetric Warfare Group (AWG); ADA doctrine or 
combat  developer  in the Capability  Development  Integration Directorate (CDID);  Directorate of Training 
and Doctrine Development (DOTD); Office, of Chief of Air Defense Ar tillery (OCADA); HRC positions; 
Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC); U.S. Army Recruiting Command staff positions; 
AC/Reserve Component (RC) positions; advanced civil schooling (based on Army requirements); Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) instruc tor; USMA instructor or tactical officer; Foreign Service 
exchange officer or Foreign Service school exchange officer; JIIM assignments; fellowship/internship positions;  aide-de-camp.)  
(4) Self-development. All CPTs must exercise continuous self -development and must master all aspects 
of ADA operations  including  JIIM operations.  Self-development  initiatives  may include (among others)  on- 
line/correspondence courses, civilian education, professional reading programs, and other institutional training to broaden t heir warfighting perspective. Officers are eligible for functional designation at both 
their 4
th and 7th years of service. The formal designation of functional areas is based on the needs of the 
Army, officer preference, military experience, and civilian s chooling. Several functional areas provide 
advanced  civil schooling,  which  may be granted  upon selection to the functional  area (subject  to change).  
(5) Desired experience. Developmental assignments, both branch- specific and generalist, will provide 
ADA CPTs with exposure to the Army and in some cases JIIM organizations. The CPTs must have mastered their troop leading skills and fully understand operations at battery, battalion, and brigade levels.  At this stage in their career  development,  ADA CPTs  must  recognize  how the Army  functions and 
fights.  
g. MAJ Development.  
(1) Education. At the 7th year, an HQDA -level board considers Army requirements and each officer’s 
skills, experience, and preferences before assigning each officer to a branch or functional area in one  of 
three functional categories. Officers selected to remain in the ADA basic branch (functionally designated) 
must successfully complete Intermediate Level Education (ILE) and their KD assignment(s) to become 
competitive for promotion to lieutenant colonel (LTC). ILE/JPME I is critical at this point in an ADA 
officer’s career and must be completed prior to the 15th year of commissioned service. This prepares them 
for success in their next 10 years of service and is a prerequisite for Senior Service College (SSC) 
attendance. Upon completion of ILE/JPME I, ADA MAJs must continue to aggressively prepare for and 
seek the skills and experience that will prepare them for promotion to LTC.  
(2) KD Assignments. The following are considered KD assignments for ADA MAJs:  
(a) Battalion/Brigade S -3 or XO of an ADA  organization.    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
6  
(b) Battalion/Brigade S -3 or XO of a Special Troops Battalion (STB) or another combat arms  unit. 
(c) AAMDC Plans  Officer.  
(d) AAMDC or ADA Brigade, Senior ADA Fire Control  Officer.  
(e) Security Force Assistant  Brigades  
(3) Developmental and Broadening Assignments. Completion of ILE and a minimum of 12 months in a 
key developmental  assignment  fully qualify  for promotion to LTC.  The optimal  timeline  provides  officers 
with the opportunity to serve in one or more of the above listed positions for at least 18- 24 months. 
Officers will not suffer prejudice towards promotion or assignment consideration because of not having 
served as an ADA battalion or brigade S -3/XO. Some ADA MAJs may be assigned to either branch-  
specific or generalist assignments allowing them to develop a wider perspective of the Army or other services (some examples  below):  
(a) CTC senior  O/C. 
(b) ADA brigade staff  officer.  
(c) USAADAS/ILE faculty and staf f officer.  
(d) Brigade/division/corps staff  officer.  
(e) GMD Brigade/ARSPACE/SMDC staff  officer.  
(f) Department of Defense (DoD)/JIIM/Army/ACOM staff  officer.  
(g) Battle Command Training Program (BCTP)  positions.  
(h) Service school  instructor.  
(i) AC/RC Service in a cross- component billet  positions.  
(j) Other branch or multi -functional  positions.  
(1) Inspector  General.  
(2) Fellowship/Internship positions.  
(3) ROTC/USMA  instructor.  
(4) FCoE  Staff/CDID/DOTD/OCADA.  
(5) ATEC/U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC).  
(6) AWG  assignments.  
(7) Futures/Army Staff G -8 (Force Development [FD]) and HRC  positions.  
(4) Self-development. All MAJs must exercise continuous self -development to fully master all aspects of 
ADA operations, including JIIM operations. MAJs should also begin the process of mastering the Fires 
functional concept. Self -development initiatives may include (among others) on- line/correspondence 
courses,  civilian  education,  professional  reading programs,  and other  institutional  training  to broaden their 
warfighting perspective. Skills and experience continue to drive an officer's career path and future 
assignments. See Figure 13-1. 
(5) Desired experience. At this stage, an ADA MAJ must hone skills in the planning and execution of ADA 
TTPs and develop expertise in the JIIM operational environment. While 12 months is the minimum standard, an officer should serve for as long as possible in key  developmental assignments.  
h. LTC Development.  
(1) Education. Officers selected for LTC must seek assignments of greater responsibility in branch 
positions. The SSC selection board will screen ADA LTCs’ records after their 16th year of service. Completion of ILE is required for attendance consideration. SSC is the final major military educational program available to prepare officers for position of greates t responsibility in the DoD Approximately 30-  
35 percent  of a corps  year group is selected to attend during their years  of eligibility  that run between the 
16th and 23rd years of service. Officers selected for command will attend a Pre- Command Course.  
(2) KD Assignments. ADA LTCs must continue to aggressively prepare for and seek the skills and 
experience that will prepare  them  for promotion to COL.  The objective in LTC assignments  is to give ADA 
officers the opportunity to make a greater contribution to the branch and the Army. KD assignments for LTCs include the following:  
(a) CSL battalion- level command.  
(b) Transition Team  Commander.  
(c) AAMDC Deputy Chief of Staff.  
   
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
7  
(d) AAMDC Deputy G3. 
(e) Corps Chief of AMD  Operations.  
(f) Division Chief of AMD  Operations.  
(3) Developmental and Broadening Assignments. The following are some possible examples of  branch-  
specific/generalist assignments for  LTCs:  
(a) SMDC staff  officer.  
(b) DoD/JIIM/Army/ACOM staff  officer.  
(c) Service school instructor/staff  officer.  
(d) AC/RC Service in a cross- component billet  positions.  
(e) BCTP positions.  
(f) Director  of OCADA,  selected  FCoE  assignments  (G5 Chief  of Plans  & Futures,  Senior  AMD  Concepts 
Officer,  Chief  of Force  Development,  Senior  TCM  Staff Officer,  or Chief  of Lessons  Learned).  
(g) HRC staff.  
(h) Chief, GMD fire direction center  (FDC).  
(i) FCoE staff/Fires  Officer.  
(4) Self-development. Completion of SSC and a minimum of 12 months in a KD assignment will 
fully qualify lieutenant colonels for promotion to COL. LTCs should also continue to develop Fires  
skills.  
(5) Desired experience. ADA LTCs must have mastery level understanding of ADA Operations, Logistics, 
and the Command and Control  required for Combatant  Command level operations.  Officers  are expected 
to complete a minimum of 12 months of assignment at a Theater Level Command; (AAMDC, Army 
Service Component Command [ASCC], Combatant Command [COCOM]); at a Major Subordinate 
Command, (TRADOC, FORSCOM); or Army / Joint Staff. Officers selected as Battalion Commanders should have this experience prior to or immediat ely following command.  
i. Colonel (COL) Development . 
(1) Education. The a nnual SSC selection board reviews the files of COLs until their 23rd year of service. 
The majority of COLs will attend the resident training or be awarded Military Education Level (MEL) SSC 
certification from the U.S. Army War College Distance Education Co urse during the latter 3 years of their 
eligibility window for more information on the available SSC -level courses. Officers selected for 
command will also attend a Pre- Command Course. COLs and LTC (P) selected to serve as TRADOC 
Capabilities Manager shoul d attend the Combat Developers  Course.  
(2) KD Assignments. ADA COLs contribute to the branch by serving in key and developmental 
assignments to include the following:  
(a) CSL brigade- level command (e.g., ADA brigade, garrison command, recruiting,  GMD Brigade).  
(b) DA G-8 Air Defense Division,  Chief -FDG.  
(c) AAMDC Chief of Staff.  
(d) AAMDC Assistant Chief of  Staff G-3. 
(e) MTT Trainer/Advisor.  
(3) Developmental  and Broadening Assignments.  The following  are some possible  examples  of branch-  
specific/generalist assignments for  COLs:  
(a) SMDC/German Air and Missile Defense Force/GMD staff  officer.  
(b) DoD/Joint/Army/ACOM staff  officer.  
(c) Installation staff  officer.  
(d) ROTC/USMA staff  officer.  
(e) AC/RC Service in a cross -component billet  positions.  
(f) USAADAS Assistant  Commandant.  
(g) FCoE G 3/5/7, TCM- AAMDC,  TCM -ADA Brigade; MDA, Director Warfighter  Integration; 
USSTRATCOM Deputy Commander or Director of Operations  JFCC- IMD.  
(4) Self-development. ADA COLs must maintain their branch skills and keep current on all changes that 
affect  the Soldiers  they command and/or  manage.  Mastery  of all aspects  of offensive and defensive  Fires 
is critical  to service  as a Fires  General  Officer.  JIIM assignments  are important  during this phase.  
(5) Desired experience. ADA COLs must have mastery level understanding of Strategic, Political, 
and National  Security  implications  of ADA Operations.  Officers  are expected to complete 12 months    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
8 assignment as a G3, Chief of Staff, Senior Staff Officer, or Division Chief at a Theater Level Command; 
(AAMDC, ASCC, COCOM); an  ACOM, (TRADOC, FORSCOM); or Army / Joint Staff. Officers selected as 
Brigade Commanders should have this experience prior to or immediately following command.  
 
 
(Figure 12- 1) 
 
4. Warrant Officer  Development.  
a. Unique knowledge and skills of Air Defense Warrant Officers. Air Defense Warrant Officers are 
adaptive and experienced combat leaders who administer, manage, maintain, operate, and innovatively integrate a wide variety of emerging technologically  advanced Air Defense specific computer application 
software used  to develop  C2 communication  / data link architecture and air and missile  defense designs 
to employ various Air Defense Missile and JIIM systems. Air Defense Warrant Officers must be dynamic trainers,  confident  warfighters,  and advisors,  develo pers of specialized  teams,  and technical  experts.  
(1) The 140A Command and Control Systems Integrator supervises, coordinates, plans, and manages 
joint tactical data link (TDL) operations, maintenance, and training associated with Air Defense systems to includ e the Forward Area Air Defense Command, Control, and Intelligence (FAAD C2I)/ Counter -Rocket, 
Artillery, and Mortar Command and Control systems; Patriot Tactical Command Systems; Patriot 
Information Coordination Centrals; Patriot Battery Command Posts (BCP ); Air and Missile Defense 
Planning Control Systems (AMDPCS); ADAM Cells; and the Theater Missile- Warning Detachments. 
Advises the commander on joint TDL implementation, employment, capabilities, and configuration management for all Air Defense systems. Tr ains Soldiers and Officers on the necessary tasks of 
employing TDL capabilities and software configuration that best supports Army Air Defense operations. 
Analyzes and  interprets  data employed  in the joint TDL architecture for a joint theater  to support  immature 
  
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
9  
or sustained operations with the Air Defense assets on hand, and when necessary, serve as detachment 
commander. Serves as the unit Interface Control Officer (ICO) and may serve as the Joint Interface 
Control Officer (JICO), Regional Interface Control Officer (RICO), Sector Regional Interface Control 
Officer, or Joint Interface Control Cell Watch Officer. Coordinates with the JICO to conduct Multi TDL 
Network (MTN) planning and execution, to include track data management, TDL operations, and TDL 
maintenance. Can serve in other nominative positions army wide with duties as instructors, career managers or staff positions in directorates.140A Command and Control Integrators supervise, plan, maintain, manage, and coordinate all joint data link operations and command, control, communications, 
computers, and intelligence (C4I) systems training associated with FAAD; Patriot Battery Command Post 
(BCP); Patriot Tactical Control System (TCS); AMDPCS; Corps, Division, and Brigade- level Air De fense 
Airspace Management (ADAM) cells; and the JTAGS, with ancillary equipment. Responsible for 
coordinating the activities of enhanced operators for the maintenance of computers, commercial off the 
shelf and common hardware and software including ancillary equipment. Estimates repair priorities based on fix or fight criteria and availability of required assets. Advises the commander on system employment 
options, capabilities, and configuration management for all Army AMD Command and Control (C2) 
systems. Responsible for materiel reporting and readiness, system employment, and crew certifications. 
Acts as instructors for Soldiers and officers, teaching the necessary tasks of employing assets and adapting the software that best supports Army and AMD C2 doctr ine. Analyzes and interprets data 
employed in the communications architecture for a joint theater to support immature or sustained 
operations with the C2 assets on hand, and when necessary, serves as the detachment commander.  
Serves as the Army track data coordinator for the regional area AMD coordinator; and the regional RICO. 
Daily duties include configuration management for the AMDPCS, including ancillary equipment. Serves 
as data- link managers providing prioritization and standard operating procedures f or joint interoperability.  
Can serve in other nominative positions Army -wide, with duties as instructors, career managers, or in staff 
positions.  
 
(Figure 12- 2) 
  
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
10  
(2) 140K Air and Missile Defense Systems Tactician serves as a Subject Matter Expert (SME) on the 
employment and operations Air & Missile Defense (AMD) systems as a Tactical Control Officer (TCO) at 
the battery level, TD and Standardization Officer at the battalion level and ADAFCO and Standardization 
Officer at the brigade and Army  Air and Missile Defense Command level. Monitor/Identify aircraft 
according to established procedures,  initiate  and monitor  engagements  of threat  aircraft  and missiles,  and 
plan/develop air and missile defense designs in support of assigned/contingency mis sions. Advise the 
commander on capabilities and limitations of the AMD systems. Coach, teach, mentor and evaluate Soldiers in AMD system operating tactics, techniques, procedures, and Joint Kill Chain (JKC) functions 
Advises the commander on all tactical and technical considerations at all  levels.  
 
(Figure 12- 3) 
 
(3) 140L Air and Missile Defense Systems Technician serves as a SME on the employment and 
operations of AMD systems as an AMD System Support Technician. Plans and supervises the 
maintenance and logistical requirements/activities within AMD units. Monitors the AMD system and 
related support equipment to prevent, detect, diagnose, or repair operator error and/or system 
malfunctions. Coaches, teach mentor, evaluate Soldiers in AMD system maintenance procedures, and 
evaluate the effectiveness of maintenance programs. Manages the use and care of special tools and 
support equipment, oversees the utilization of The Army Maintenance Management System (TAMMS). 
Monitors  and coordinates  the installation of modifications  to the AMD  system.  Implements  proper  safety 
and security procedures applicable to the operation and maintenance support of the AMD system. 
Advises the commander on all AMD technical considerations at all  levels.  
  
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
11  
 
(Figure 1 2-4) 
 
b. WO1  Development.  
(1) Education. After graduation from Warrant Officer Candidate School (WOCS) and appointment to 
grade WO1, all Warrant Officers will attend the Warrant Officer Basic Course (WOBC).  WOBC provides 
functional training in the MOS while reinforcing the leadership training provided in WOCS.  
(a) MOS 140A attends the Command and Control Systems Integrator WOBC (Course Number: 4F -140A). 
140A WOBC trains 140A WO1s to supervise and coordinate data link management, maintenance, and 
training associated with FAAD C4I systems; Patriot and THAAD Tactical Control Station with the 
automated Battery Command Post; Air and Missile Defense Planning and Control System and ADAM Cells.  The following  are courses taught  in the 140A  WOBC  or are mandatory  courses  that 140A  W01s  are 
required to complete prior to promotion to CW2:  
(1) Fundamental Basic Electronic Course (received during 4F -140A  WOBC).  
(2) JT102 Multi -TDL Advanced Joint Interoperability Course –  MAJIC (received during 4F -140A  WOBC).  
(3) Action Officer Development Course:  Course Number: 131- P00. 
(b) MOS 140K attends the Air and Missile Defense Tactician WOBC (Course Number: 4F -140K WOBC). 
140K WOBC provides the principles and functional theory of operations and integration, both vertically 
and horizontally, of Ar my ADA systems, and joint services and allied nations. The following are courses 
taught in the 140K WOBC or are required courses that 140K W01s are required to complete prior to 
promotion to  CW2:  
(1) Action Officer Development Course: Course Number:  131-P00. 
(c) MOS 140L attends the Air and Missile Defense Technician WOBC (Course Number: 4F140L WOBC). 
WOBC provides the principles and functional theory of operations and integration, both vertically and 
horizontally, of Army ADA systems, and joint services and allied nations. The following are courses taught 
in the 140L WOBC  or are mandatory  courses  that 140L  WO1s  are required to complete prior to promotion 
to CW2:  
(1) Fort Sill Global Combat Support System -Army (GCSS -Army): Course Number: (Received during  
4F- 140L WOBC).  
(2) Action Officer Development Course: Course Number:  131-P00. 
(3) Fundamental  Basic  Electronic  Course,  Alternate/Direct  Current  Certification  Level  I (received during 
4F-140L WOBC).  
(4) MOS 140L attends the Air and Missile Defense Technician WOBC (Course Number: 4F140L (P)). 
WOBC provides the principles and functional theory of operations and integration, both vertically and 
horizontally,  of Army  ADA systems,  and joint services and allied  nations.  The following  are courses  taught  
  
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
12  
in the 140L WOBC or are required courses that 140L WO1s are required to complete prior to promotion 
to CW2:  
(1) Fort Sill GCSS -Army Clerk: Course Number: FB GCSS -ARMY Clerk (Received during 4F -140L 
WOBC).  
(2) Action Officer Development Course: Course Number:  131-P00. 
(3) Fundamental Basic Electronic Course (received during 4F -140L WOBC).  
(2) Assignment.  
(a) 140A: After WOBC, WO1s should be assigned as C2 Systems Integrator at ADAM Cell BCTs, Fires 
Brigades, Battlefield Surveillance Brigades (BfSB), Maneuver Enhancement Brigades (MEB), CAB, or 
ADA Battalions. WO1s for their first assignment should not be assigned to Space and Missile Defense 
Commands until promotion to CW2.  
(b) 140K: After WOBC, it is strongly recommended that WO1s be initially assigned as Patriot Fire Unit 
AMD Tactic ian in an ADA Battalion (Patriot), ADA Composite Battalion (Patriot/IFPC), ADA Composite 
Battalion (C -RAM/IFPC), or ADA Battalion  (IFPC).  
(c) 140L: After WOBC, it is strongly recommended that WO1s be initially assigned as an AMD Technician 
in an ADA Battalion (Patriot) or ADA Composite Battalion (Patriot/IFPC). WO1s for their first assignment should only be assigned to a THAAD Battery after special consideration, CW2s should fill following 
assignments - Patriot System Support Section Officer / Patriot Fire Unit  and Field Level Maintenance 
Manager.  
(3) Self Development.  
(a) 140A: Recommend completion of the following college level courses: Associates Degree (MOS 
related). The following courses will facilitate your development as a 140A and it is recommended the 
course be completed prior to promotion to CW2  
(1) CompTIA NET+  Certification  
(2) CompTIA A+  Certification  
(3) Introduction to Computer Operating Systems.  
(b) 140K: Recommend completion of the following college level courses: Associates Degree (MOS 
related). The following courses w ill facilitate your development as a 140K and it is recommended the 
course be completed prior to promotion to CW2:  
(1) CompTIA NET+  Certification  
(2) CompTIA A+  Certification  
(3) Introduction to Joint Air and Missile Defense Operations  Course.  
(c) 140L: Recommend completi on of the following college level courses: Associates Degree (MOS 
related). The following courses will facilitate your development as a 140L and it is recommended the 
course be completed prior to promotion to CW2:  
(1) Support Operation Course: Course Number:  8A-FA90/551- F39) 
(2) Army Maintenance Management Course: Course Number:  8A-F3 
(3) DAU: BCF 110: Fundamentals Business Financial  management.  
(4) DAU: ACQ 101: Fundamentals of Systems Acquisition management  
(5) Desired experience.  
(a) 140A: Command and Control Systems Integrator capable of configuring and integrating C2 systems 
into an Army and Joint Data Link Network Architecture to provide situational awareness, early warning, 
ADA planning, and ADA  interoperability.  
(b) 140K: Air and Missile Defense System Tactician/Technician Patriot/THAAD System Support Officer 
capable of managing Patriot/THAAD Fire Unit Field Level Maintenance Operations to include GCSS - 
ARMY / Prescribed Load List (PLL)/DMPL and Test Measuring and Diagnostic Equipment (TMDE) and 
Patriot/THAAD  Fire Unit Operational  Readiness  Reporting.  WOBC  graduates,  will be warfighters  skilled  in 
in all areas of AMD and joint operations. Soldiers are capable of operating some of the most complex and 
lethal systems in the United States Army. The Warrant Officer who attends this course will demonstrate 
an intimate knowledge of AMD tactics and doctrine by expertly designing AMD defenses that defend 
important geopolitical assets against realistic and robust threats posed by determined enemies. They will 
be able to create and implement these feasible and effective AMD defense plans under any conditions, 
anytime, anywhere in the world. They will emerge as better leaders having continued their self - 
development via civilian education opportunities and they will serve as force m ultipliers within their units 
and the Army. 140K WO1s are required to complete prior to promotion to CW2:    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
13  
(1) JT 101: Link -16 Joint Interoperability  Course  
(2) Action Officer Development Course: Course Number:  131– P00 
(c) 140L: WOBC graduates will be capable and competent AMD leaders and technical experts who are 
confident in their ability to maintain a wide array of complex Army Integrated Air and Missile Defense 
(AIAMD) equipment as well as manage the extensive logistical requirements of those AMD  units. These 
leaders will emerge from the course more technically proficient, by leveraging the available opportunities 
provided within the 140L curriculum, they will advance their civilian education and progress toward 
obtaining professional certifications. The critical thinking skills gained by these well -rounded officers who 
graduate the 140L course will enhance their value to their future organizations and to the Army as a whole. 140L WO1s are required to complete prior to promotion to CW2:  
(1) GCSS- Army  Certification  
(2) Action Officer Development Course: Course Number:  131– P00 
c. CW2  Development.  
(1) Education.  
(a) 140A: Attend the Air Defense Artillery Warrant Officer Advanced Course (WOAC) Phase I: Course 
Number: 2- 44-C32- 140A and Multi -TDL Planners Course: Course Number: JT -201 (JT -201) is pre-  
requisite for attendance of WOAC PH 1). Completion of an associate’s degree or equivalent in a 
discipline related to MOS 140A prior to eligibility for selection to CW3.  
(b) 140K: Attend the Air Defense Artillery WOAC Phase I: Course Number: 2- 44-C32- 140K and Link 16 
Joint Interoperability Course:  Course number:  JT -101 the prerequisite for attendance of  WOAC.  
(c) 140L: Attend the Air Defense Artillery WOAC Phase I: Course Number: 2- 44-C32- 140L the 
prerequisite for attendance of  WOA C. 
(2) Assignments.  
(a) 140A: CW2s are assigned to ADAM Cell BCT, Battlefield Surveillance Brigades (BfSB), Maneuver 
Enhancement  Brigades  (MEB),  SMDC  or ADA battalions.  CW2s  may be assigned  to nominative  position 
as a TAC Officer at the Warrant Officer Career Coll ege (WOCC), but only after completing at least three 
years in an ADAM/BAE cell or ADA  battalion.  
(b) 140K: CW2s with assignment/duty as a Patriot/THAAD Fire Unit AMD Tactician TCO, Battery  Trainer, 
and Army Integrated Air and Missile Defense (AIAMD) Test Detac hment, performing friendly protect 
functions, enforcing rules of engagement (ROE), and managing air battle functionality. CW2s may be assigned to such nominative positions as TAC Officer at the Warrant Officer Career Center (WOCC), but 
only after completing at least 2 years as a  TCO.  
(c) 140L:  CW2s  with assignment/duty  as a Patriot/THAAD  Fire Unit AMD  Patriot  System Support  Officer  
/Patriot Fire Unit and Field Level Maintenance Manager. CW2s may be assigned to such nominative 
positions as TAC Officer at the Warrant Officer Career Center (WOCC), but only after completing at least 
2 years as an AMD Systems Technician.  
(3) Self Development.  
(a) 140A:  Completion of an Undergraduate  Degree  or equivalent  in a discipline  related  to MOS  140A  prior 
to eligibility for selection to CW3 is the civilian education goal at this stage of development. Additional 
recommended courses to be completed prior to promotion to CW3 include:  
(1) Joint Firepower  Course.  
(2) Joint Air Tasking Order Processes Course (JATOPC), Army Joint Support Team, Hurlburt  Field, 
Florida.  
(b) 140K:  Completion of an Undergraduate  Degree  or equivalent  in a discipline  related  to MOS  140K  prior 
to eligibility for selection to CW3 is the civilian education goal at this stage of development. Additional 
recommended courses to be completed prior to promotion to CW3  include:  
(1) Multi -TDL Advanced Joint Interoperability Course -  MAJIC: Course Number: JT -102. 
(2) Patriot Top Gun Course: Course Number: 2F -SIT5/4F -ASIT5.  
(3) Introduction to Joint Air and Missile Defense Operations Course: Course Number: J3OP -US020.  
(4) Army Space Cadre Basic Course (ASCBC) Phase 1 &  2. 
(5) THAAD ASI -7A Course.  
(6) BMDS  Staff  Course.    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
14  
(c) 140L:  Completion of an Undergraduate  Degree or equivalent  in a discipline related  to MOS  140L prior 
to eligibility for selection to CW3 is the civilian education goal at this stage of development. Additional 
recommended courses to be completed prior to promotion to CW3 include:  
(1) GCSS- Army Mid -Level Man ager Course.  
(2) AC/DC Level II  Certification.  
(3) Lean Six Sigma (Yellow Belt)  Certification.  
(4) THAAD 140L ASI  Course.  
(7) Desired experience.  
(a) 140A:  Command and Control  Systems  Integrator  capable of configuring  and integrating BCT and ADA 
battalion C2 systems into an Army and Joint Data Link Network Architecture to provide situational 
awareness, early warning, ADA planning, and ADA  interoperability.  
(b) 140K: Air and Missile Defense System Tactician that successfully served as a TCO, Battery Trainer, 
and/or TD  for a minim um of two one year with a maximum of 3 years.  
(c) 140L: Air and Missile Defense System Technician that successfully served as the Patriot/THAAD 
Systems Support Officer for minimum of one with a maximum of 3 years.  
d. CW3  Development.  
(1) Education.  
(a) 140A: ADA Warrant Officer Advanced Course Phase II, course number : 2-44-C32 
Ph. 2. The officer should complete JT -301, Joint Interoperability Control Officer (JICO) Course for career 
development prior to promotion to CW4.  
(b) 140K: ADA Warrant Officer Advanced Course Phase II, Course number  :2-44-C32 
Ph. 2. The officer should complete the following courses for career development prior to promotion to 
CW4.  
(c) 140L: ADA Warrant Officer Advanced Course Phase II, Course number  :2-44-C32 
Ph. 2. The officer should complete the following courses for career development prior to promotion to 
CW4  
(1) 140K: Patriot Top Gun Course: Course Number:  2F-SIT5/4F -ASIT5.  
(2) 140K: ADAFCO Course Number:  2G-SI/ASIT4. 
(3) 140A/K: Multi -TDL Advanced Joint Interoperability -  MAJIC: Course Number:  JT-102. 
(4) 140L: GCSS -Army Supervisor Course:  Course Number: GCSS -Army Supervisor  Course.  
(2) Assignments.  
(a) 140A: Army Air and Missile Defense Command, ADAM Cell Division, Combat Aviation Brigade, 
Maneuver Enhancement Brigade, Space and Missile Defense Command, Theater Missile Warning Detachment,  THAAD,  or ADA Brigade.  Assigned as an instructor  or doctrine writer  at the United  States 
Army Air Defense Artillery School, JRTC Trainer/Mentor, TAC Officer at WOCC, or other special 
assignments.  
(b) 140K: ADA Battalion FDC as TD, ADA Battalion S 3 Standardization Officer, THAAD TCO, 
Instructor/Doctrine  writer  at the United  States  Army  Air Defense Artillery  School  (USAADAS),  TAC Officer 
at the WOCC or other special  assignments.  
(c) 140L: ADA Battalion Readiness Officer as Manager and supervisor the Battalion Readiness Center 
(BRC) or Army Integrated Air and Missile Defense (AIAMD) Test Detachment; monitoring, logistically 
supporting, and reporting of ADA Weapon systems and ancillary  equipment to HQDA, TAC Officer at the 
WOCC or other special  assignments.  
(3) Self Development.  
(a) 140A: Completion of an Undergraduate degree in a discipline related to MOS 140A is  recommended 
prior to eligibility for selection to CW4.  
(b) 140K: Completion of an Undergraduate degree in a discipline related to MOS 140K is  recommended 
prior to eligibility for selection to  CW4.  
(c) 140L:  Completion of an Undergraduate  degree  in a discipline  related to MOS  140L  is recommended 
prior to eligibility for selection to  CW4.  
Recommend completion of the following courses for career development prior to promotion to CW4:  
(4) Desired experience.  
(a) 140A: Command and Control Systems Integrator capable of configuring and integrating C2 systems 
into an Army and Joint Data Link Network Architecture to provide situational awareness, early warning, ADA planning,  and ADA interoperability.  Have served  as the Army  ICO for assigned units  at the Division 
and ADA  Brigade.    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
15  
(b) 140K: Successfully served as a TCO (Patriot and/or THAAD), TD, and/or BN S3 
Standardization Officer.  
(c) 140L: Successfully served as a Patriot/THAAD Fire Unit Organizational  Maintenance Manager or 
Battalion Readiness Center  OIC. 
e. CW4  Development.  
(1) Education.  
(a) 140A, 140K, and 140L: Must complete Warrant Officer Intermediate Level Education (WOILE), not 
later than 1 year after promotion to CW4 and prior to promotion to CW5 (DL Phase of WOSSE is a 
mandatory prerequisite prior to WOSSE  attendance).  
(2) Assignments.  
(b) 140A: AAMDC Watch Officer, MACOM Watch Officer, Corps Watch Officer, AMD Cross 
Functional  Team (CFT), USAADAS ADA Proponent Warrant Of ficer or Writer/Instructor, TRADOC 
Capability Manager –  ADA Brigade (TCM -ADA BDE), ADAM Cell Corps, Space and Missile Defense 
Command, FCoE, JFCOM, Theater Missile Warning Detachment. ATEC, HRC ADA Career Manager, 
WOCC Commander, Instructor, or other speci alty assignments.  
(c) 140K: AAMDC and ADA Brigade, ADAFCO, CDID, Brigade S3 Standardization Officer,  USAADAS 
ADA Proponent Warrant Officer or Writer/Instructor, ATEC, Wargaming and Exercise (Futures Battle 
Lab), AEC, OTC, HRC ADA Career Manager, WOCC Commander  or Instructor or other specialty 
assignments.  
(d) 140L: AAMDC and ADA Brigade Support Operations, CDID, USAADAS ADA Proponent 
Warrant Officer or Writer/Instructor, ATEC, AEC, OTC, HRC ADA Career Manager, WOCC 
Commander or instructor or other specialty  assignm ents 
(3) Self Development: 140A, 140K, and 140L. Completion of a Graduate Degree is recommended prior to 
promotion board eligibility. Complete the following courses for career development and prior to promotion to CW5:  
(1) Combat Development Course: Course N umber: ALMC -CD. 
(2) Army Acquisition Basic Course: Course Number:  ALMC -QA. 
(3) Manpower and Force Management Course: Course Number:  7C-F49/500- ASIA3.  
(4) Desired Experience  
(a) 140A: Command and Control Systems Integrator capable of configuring and integrating C2 systems 
into an Army and Joint Data Link Network Architecture to provide situational awareness, early warning, ADA planning, and ADA interoperability. Can serve in Joint positions as a Track Data Coordinator, 
Tactical  Data Link Manager,  Regional/Sector  Interface Control  Officer,  and when  needed as well  as within 
USAADAS as a writer/instructor/directorate action officer, Proponent Warrant Officer, or as a Career 
Manager at HRC. These warrant officers provide leadership, guidance, technical input, and direction to 
subordinate elements, staff agencies, and field commanders up to and including theater  level.  
(b) 140K: CW4s should have experience at the AAMDC and/or ADA BDE ADAFCO, Brigade 
Standardization Officer, as well as within USAADAS as a writer/instructor/d irectorate action officer, 
Proponent Warrant Officer, or as a Career Manager at HRC. These warrant officers provide leadership, 
guidance,  technical  input,  and direction  to subordinate  elements,  staff agencies,  and field commanders  up 
to and including theater  level.  
(c) 140L: CW4s should have experience at the AAMDC and/or ADA BDE Support and Logistic 
Operations, as well as within USAADAS as a writer/instructor/directorate action officer, Proponent 
Warrant  Officer,  or as a Career  Manager  at HRC.  These warra nt officers  provide  leadership,  guidance, 
technical input, and direction to subordinate elements, staff agencies, and field commanders up to and 
including theater  level.  
f. CW5  Development  
(1) Education 140A, 140K, and 140L:  No later than 1 year after promotion to CW5, must complete 
Warrant Officer Senior Service Education (DL- A Phase of WOSSE is a mandatory pre- requisite prior to 
WOSSE attendance).  Technical  certifications  and continuous  lifelong  learning to enhance their mastery  of 
Air Defense Artillery systems  are required. Recommend completion of a graduate degree.  
(2) Nominative Assignments:  Nominative WO positions throughout the  Army.  
(3) Assignments  
(a) 140A: AAMDC Strategic TDL Coordinator, AAMDC Command Chief Warrant Officer (CCWO), 
United States Army Space and Missile Defense / Army Forces Strategic Command (SMDC/ARSTRAT)    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
16  
Command Chief Warrant Officer, Chief Warrant Officer of the Air Defense Artillery Branch (CWOB), or 
other specialty assignments.  
(b) 140K: AAMDC, Standardization Officer, AAMDC,  CCWO, United States Army Space and Missile 
Defense / Army Forces Strategic Command (SMDC/ARSTRAT) Command Chief Warrant Officer, 
Chief Warrant Officer of the Air Defense Artillery Branch (CWOB), ATEC, AEC, OTC, TRADOC 
Capability Manager –  Army Air and Mis sile Defense Command (TCM- AAMDC) Life Cycle Manager, or 
other specialty  assignments.  
(c) 140L: AAMDC, Support Operation, AAMDC, CCWO, United States Army Space and Missile Defense / 
Army Forces Strategic Command (SMDC/ARSTRAT) Command Chief Warrant Officer, Chief Warrant Officer of the Air Defense Artillery Branch (CWOB), Air and Missile Defense (AMD) Cross Functional 
Team (CFT), ATEC, AEC, OTC, TRADOC Capability Manager –  Army Air and Missile Defense  Command 
(TCM -AAMDC) Life Cycle Manager, or other specialty  assignments.  
(4) Self Development. Technical certifications and continuous lifelong learning.  
(5) Desired experience:  
(a) 140A CW5 should have ADA C2 systems experience at all levels and maintain proficiency  throughout 
their career.  
(b) 140K CW5 at the master level shoul d have tactical experience with all AMD systems in the 
ADA portfolio, and maintain proficiency throughout their  career.  
(c) 140L: CW5 at the master level should have technical experience with all AMD systems in the ADA 
portfolio, and maintain proficiency throu ghout their  career.  
 
5. Reserve Component Officers  
a. General career development. The RC career development model for ADA will essentially mirror that of 
RA officers/WOs, except that assignments will not be limited to one component or control group within a 
component. Figures 12- 4 (officers) and 12- 5 (WOs) delineate the mandatory timeline for promotion to the 
next higher  grade.  In certain cases,  an RC officer  can be promoted to the next higher  grade after meeting 
minimum time in grade requirements. The ADA of ficer should count on being dual branched to facilitate 
career progression. In addition, an ADA officer will most likely be required to branch transfer to another 
basic branch due to limited geographical and upward mobility positions; however, these officers should remain proficient.  
b. Role. ADA RC officers/WOs serve in most of the same roles and missions as their RA counterparts. 
The unique nature of the RC Soldier's role as a citizen Soldier poses a challenge for professional 
development; however, RC officers/WOs are expected to follow RA development patterns as closely as 
possible. RC officers/WOs have increased win dows to complete mandatory educational requirements. To 
meet professional development objectives, RC officers/WOs must be willing to rotate between ARNG and 
USAR Troop Program Units, Individual Ready Reserves, the Individual Mobilization Augmentee Program,  
and other RA and RC programs. Geographical considerations necessitate these transfers, as well as the 
need to provide as many officers/WOs as possible, the opportunity to serve with troops in leadership and 
staff positions. Additionally, there may be occasions when RC officers/WOs will be transferred to the 
Individual  Ready  Reserves  while  they complete  mandatory  education requirements.  Such  transfers  will be 
temporary and should not be seen as affecting negatively on the officer’s/WO's career. The success of an 
RC officer/WO  is not measured by the length of service  in any one component  or control  group,  but by the 
officer’s/WO’s breadth of experience, duty performance, and adherence to branch requirements. (Note: 
Figures 12- 1, 12- 2, 12- 3, 12- 4, and 12- 5 illustrate the typical RA and RC officer and WO careers from 
accession to  separation.)  
c. WO assignments. WOs, as the branch’s technical experts, are considered certified upon successful 
completion of the Warrant Officer Basic Course (WOBC) and remain so throughout their WO career 
(140X specialty code denotes a position that can be filled by either a 140A, 140K, or 140L, currently 
only approved for GMD  positions).  
d. RC officer qualification and development. Career development model is at Figure  12-4. 
(1) Lieutenant (1 through 6 years). RC officers must complete a minimum of 90 hours of 
college/university credits to receive a commission. ADA BOLC -B is the starting point for newly accessed 
RC ADA officers. RC ADA officers should complete the resident initial leadership i nstruction by the 18th 
month for ARNG officers (the 2nd year for USAR officers), or prior to the end of the 3rd year for OCS graduates and direct appointees. Officers should seek to serve in more than one unit position during this 
phase, allowing for maxim um exposure to the diversified  functions  within  an ADA unit. Typical  ADA 
lieutenant  assignments    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
17  
include TCO, platoon leader, battery XO, battery maintenance officer, and battalion staff officer. Officers 
are encouraged to actively parti cipate in professional reading programs and continue correspondence 
studies. Officers must earn an Undergraduate degree from an accredited college/university to qualify for promotion to CPT.  
(2) CPT (7 through 13 years). ADA officers must complete the resident  CCC in the RA or RC curriculum. 
The RC CCC program is divided into four phases of instruction that is to be completed within a 13 month timeframe.  The course includes  two phases  of distance learning  (DL) includes  nonresident  instruction  and 
two phase weeks of Active Duty in residence at USAADAS. During this phase, all officers are highly 
encouraged to pursue a specialty related undergraduate or graduate degree. RC ADA officers should 
aggressively seek opportunities to command an ADA battery for a minimum tour of 2 years (optimally 3 
years). RC ADA command opportunities are only available in ARNG units. Typical assignments for CPTs 
include battery command; The Army School System (TASS)/Regional Training Institute (RTI) tactical officer; bat talion, brigade, division, Joint Force Headquarters, or USAR Regional Support Command 
(RSC) staff officer; battalion liaison officer; CTC O/C; and multi -functional billets. Officers may select a 
functional area designation between the 7th and 10 years of s ervice. The designation of functional areas 
should be based upon the needs of the Army, geographical considerations, and officer preference. 
Functional area assignments are useful for bypassing temporary roadblocks to career progression in the 
ADA branch due to geographical constraints or position availability; however, RC ADA officers should endeavor to return to an ADA assignment as soon as practicable. A limited number of qualified officers 
will be accessed into the Army Acquisition Corps.  
(3) MAJ (14 through  21 years).  During this phase,  officers  should enroll  and complete Common Core ILE 
and pursue a specialty -related graduate degree. ADA officers should seek further development in ADA 
assignments during this phase. Branch standard assignments include (but are not limited to) 
battalion/brigade/division staff officer, battalion/brigade XO/S -3, ADAM Cell OIC, CTC O/C, TASS/RTI 
battalion tactical officers, and ROTC instructor  duty.  
(4) LTC (21 through 26 years). During this phase, officers should seek professional military education at 
the SSC level.  Officers  may seek assignments  to senior  command and staff positions.  Additionally,  many 
assignments in both HQDA and joint staffs are available in the Individual Mobilization Augmentee 
Program for RC officers. LTCs with 3 years’ time in grade must complete JMPE Phase I to qualify for assignment to any principal staff position at brigade or higher levels of command. If transferring from 
another branch and designated to command at the bat talion level, RC officers must have attended a 
transition course and pre- command course under the auspices of USAADAS. (Note: Exceptional officers 
selected to command an ADA battalion [minimum two- year, optimum three- year tour] might also be 
selected for r esident SSC or the Army War College Distance/Distributive Education Course.) Branch 
standard assignments include (but are not limited to) battalion commander, TASS/RTI commanders, 
brigade XO, brigade XO/S -3/operations officer, division staff officer; and C ONUSA/JIIM/HQDA -level staff 
assignment. RC ADA command opportunities are only available in ARNG  units.  
(5) COL (26 through 30 years). Assignments during this phase should provide for maximum utilization 
skills in ADA or functional area. Assignment standards include RTI/garrison commander, brigade deputy 
commander, division/corps staff officer, and training support/combat division chiefs of staff. Senior staff 
assignments include (but are not limited to) positions at National Guard Bureau Headquarters, U.S. Ar my 
Reserve Command, and on CONUSA/JIIM/HQDA staffs. If transferring from another branch and 
designated to a COL level command, officers must have attended a transition course and pre- command 
course under the auspices of USAADAS. (Note: Exceptional officers  selected to command an ADA 
brigade  [minimum 2  years,  optimum 3 years]  might  be selected  for resident  SSC or the Army  War College 
Distance/Distributive Education  Course.)  
e. RC WO qualification and development.  
(1) MOS  140A,  Command and Control  Systems  Integrator . ADA WO Development  & Utilization  Model 
(RC) is at Figure 12- 5. The 140X specialty code allows GMD positions to be filled by 140A, 140K, or 
140L.  
(a) WO1 and CW2. Same as RA MOS 140A. (References to THAAD do not apply and reference to 
Theater Missile Warning Detachment is replaced by GMD.) ARNG CW2s are required to successfully 
complete WOAC to meet eligibility requirements for promotion to CW3.  
(b) CW3. Same as RA MOS 140A. (References to USAADAS do not apply.) Additionally, successful 
completion of WOILE is required for both ARNG and USAR Warrant Officer prior to being eligible  for 
promotion to  CW4.    
 
Air Defense Artillery –  15 June 2021  
 
18  
(c) CW4. Same as RA MOS 140A. (References to THAAD, TRADOC, joint commands, Army/ACOM 
staffs, and career  managers  do not apply.)  These CW4s  also serve  in directorate  staff positions  at the 
Joint Forces Headquarters. Both ARNG and USAR Warrant Officer are required to complete WOSSE 
prior to eligibility for promotion to  CW5.  
(d) CW5. Same as RA MOS 140A. (Reference to USAADAS does not  apply.)  
(2) MOS 140E, ADA Systems Tactician/Technician will be rescinded in FY19 and replaced with MOS 
140K AMD Systems Tactician and MOS 140L AMD Systems Technician. The 140X Specialty  Reporting 
Code (SRC) allows GMD positions for 140A, 140K, or  140L.  
(a) WO1  to CW3.  At the time of publishing,  there are no positions  in the RC for WO1  through CW3  for 
MOS  140E.  
(b) CW4. Same as RA MOS 140K/L except that positions are only available in the ADA brigades and 
AAMDC. ARNG Warrant Officer are required to complete WOSSE prior to being eligible for  promotion to 
CW5. Currently, CW4s should begin, continue, or complete graduate- level studies.  
(c) CW5. Same as RA MOS 140K/L except that positions are only available in the ADA brigades  and 
AAMDC.  
 
Lifecycle Development Model / Army Career Map  
 
Figure 12- 1. AOC 14A Lifecycle development model (Active/Reserve) 
Figure 12- 2. MOS 140A Army Career Map (Active/Reserve)  
Figure 12- 3. MOS 140K Army Career Map (Active/Reserve) 
Figure 12- 4. MOS 140L Army Career Map (Active/Reserve)  